Pierre woke up late on the third of September. His head ached, the clothes he had slept in without undressing felt heavy on his body, and on his soul lay a vague consciousness of something shameful committed the day before. This shameful thing was yesterday’s conversation with Captain Ramballe.

The clock showed eleven, but it seemed peculiarly overcast outside. Pierre got up, rubbed his eyes, and, seeing the pistol with its carved butt, which Gerasim had again placed on the writing table, he remembered where he was and precisely what lay before him that day.

“Am I already too late?” thought Pierre. “No, he would probably enter Moscow no earlier than noon.” Pierre did not allow himself to reflect on what lay before him, but hastened to act quickly.

Having straightened his clothes, Pierre took the pistol in his hand and was about to leave. But here the thought occurred to him for the first time of how he was to carry this weapon outside, if not in his hand. Even under a loose kaftan it was hard to hide a big pistol. Neither in his belt nor under his arm was it possible to carry it unnoticed. Besides, the pistol had been fired, and Pierre had not had time to reload it. “Never mind, there’s still the dagger,” Pierre said to himself, though more than once, in thinking about carrying out his intention, he had decided to himself that the chief mistake of the student in 1809 had consisted in wanting to kill Napoleon with a dagger. But as if his main goal consisted not in carrying out the thing he had in mind, but in proving to himself that he had not renounced his intention and was doing everything to carry it out, Pierre quickly took the dull, nicked dagger in the green scabbard, which he had bought at the Sukhareva tower along with the pistol, and hid it under his waistcoat.

Having belted his kaftan and pulled down his hat, Pierre, trying not to make noise or meet the captain, walked down the corridor and went outside.

The fire, which he had looked at so indifferently the evening before, had grown significantly overnight. Now Moscow was burning on different sides. Carriage Row, Zamoskvorechye, the Shopping Arcade, Povarskaya Street, the barges on the Moskva River, and the firewood market by the Dorogomilovo bridge were burning at the same time.

Pierre’s path lay through back lanes to Povarskaya and from there to the Arbat, to St. Nicholas the Revealed, which had long been designated in his imagination as the place where his deed was to be accomplished. Most of the houses had their gates and shutters closed. The streets and lanes were deserted. There was a smell of smoke and burning in the air. Now and then he met Russians with anxiously timid faces and Frenchmen with a non-city, camplike look walking down the middle of the streets. Both looked at Pierre with astonishment. Besides his great height and fatness, besides the strange, gloomily concentrated and suffering expression of his face and his whole figure, the Russians studied Pierre with interest, because they could not figure out what estate this man might belong to. The French followed him with astonished eyes particularly because, unlike all other Russians, who looked at the French with fear or curiosity, Pierre paid no attention to them. By the gates of one house, three Frenchmen, explaining something to some Russians who did not understand them, stopped Pierre to ask if he knew French.

Pierre shook his head negatively and went on. In another lane, a sentry standing by a green box called out to him, and only after the repetition of the threatening cry and the sound of the sentry cocking his musket did Pierre understand that he should go over to the other side of the street. He heard and saw nothing around him. With haste and horror, he carried his intention inside him like something dreadful and alien, afraid—having been taught by the previous night’s experience—of somehow losing it. But Pierre was not destined to bring his state of mind intact to the place he was heading for. Besides, even if nothing held him up on his way, his intention could no longer be carried out, because more than four hours ago Napoleon had ridden from the suburb of Dorogomilovo down the Arbat to the Kremlin, and, in the darkest mood, was now sitting in the tsar’s office in the Kremlin palace, issuing detailed, thorough instructions about the measures to be taken immediately to put out the fires, prevent looting, and reassure the inhabitants. But Pierre did not know that; entirely absorbed by what lay before him, he suffered, as people suffer who stubbornly undertake something impossible—not because of its difficulty, but because of its unsuitability to their nature; he suffered from fear that he would weaken at the decisive moment and, as a result, would lose repect for himself.

Though he saw and heard nothing around him, he found his way by instinct and without mistake took the lanes that led him to Povarskaya.

As Pierre approached Povarskaya, the smoke became thicker and thicker, and it even became warm from the flames of the fire. Fiery tongues occasionally soared up from behind the roofs of the houses. There were more people in the streets, and those people were more alarmed. But, though he felt that something extraordinary was happening around him, he was not aware that he was approaching the fire. Walking down a path that led across a big vacant lot adjoining Povarskaya on one side and the gardens of Prince Gruzinsky’s house on the other, Pierre suddenly heard a woman’s desperate cry just next to him. He stopped as if awakening from sleep and raised his head.

By the side of the path, on the dry, dusty grass, lay a heap of household belongings: featherbeds, a samovar, icons, and trunks. On the ground by the trunks sat a thin, middle-aged woman, with long, protruding front teeth, dressed in a black coat and bonnet. This woman, rocking and muttering something, was weeping heartrendingly. Two girls, between ten and twelve years old, dressed in dirty, short dresses and coats, looked at their mother with an expression of perplexity on their pale, frightened faces. A smaller boy, about seven years old, in a long coat and someone else’s oversized cap, was weeping in the arms of an old nanny. A dirty, barefooted wench was sitting on a trunk and, having undone her pale braid, was pulling off the singed hairs and smelling them. The husband, a short, stoop-shouldered man in a civil uniform, with wheel-shaped side-whiskers and smooth temples, which could be seen from under the peaked cap that sat straight on his head, with an immobile face was pushing apart the trunks piled one on the other and pulling some sort of clothing out from under them.

The woman almost threw herself at Pierre’s feet when she saw him.

“Dear hearts of mine, good Orthodox Christians, save us, save us, dear hearts!…Somebody help us,” she managed to say through her sobs. “My little girl!…My daughter!…My youngest daughter got left behind!…She’s burned up! O-o-oh! was it for this I nursed you…O-o-oh!”

“Enough, Marya Nikolaevna,” the husband said to his wife in a soft voice, obviously only so as to justify himself before an outsider. “My sister must have taken her, where else could she be!” he added.

“Block of wood! Villain!” the woman shouted spitefully, suddenly ceasing to weep. “You have no heart, you don’t pity your own child. Another man would have gotten her out of the flames. But this one’s a block of wood, not a man, not a father. You’re a gentleman,” the woman pattered on, sobbing and turning to Pierre. “There was a fire next door, and it leaped over to us. The maid shouted ‘Fire!’ We rushed to gather things up. We ran out in whatever we had on…This is all we had time to take…God’s blessing and our marriage bed, the rest is lost. I looked for the children, Katechka wasn’t there. Oh, Lord! O-o-oh!…” and she burst into sobs again. “My dear, wee child, she’s burned up! burned up!”

“But where, where did you leave her?” asked Pierre. From the expression of his suddenly animated face, the woman understood that this man might help her.

“Dear heart! Father!” she cried, seizing him by the legs. “Benefactor, ease my heart…Aniska, go, you vile thing, show him,” she cried to the maid, opening her mouth angrily and with that displaying her long teeth still more.

“Show me, show me, I…I…I’ll do it,” Pierre said hurriedly in a breathless voice.

The dirty wench came from behind the trunk, fixed up her braid, sighed, and walked down the path on her blunt, bare feet. Pierre was as if he had come to life after a heavy swoon. He raised his head higher, his eyes lit up with a gleam of life, and he followed the maid with quick steps, overtook her, and came out on Povarskaya. The whole street was covered with a cloud of black smoke. Here and there tongues of flame burst from this cloud. A large crowd of people thronged in front of the fire. A French general stood in the middle of the street, saying something to those around him. Pierre, accompanied by the maid, wanted to reach the place where the general was standing, but French soldiers stopped him.

“On ne passe pas,” a voice cried to him.

“This way, mister,” said the maid. “We’ll take the lane past the Nikulins’.”

Pierre turned around and walked on, skipping now and then to keep up with her. The maid crossed the street, turned left into the lane, went past three houses, and turned right through the gates.

“It’s just here,” said the maid, and, running across the courtyard, she opened a little gate in a wooden fence and, stopping, pointed Pierre to a small wooden wing that was burning brightly and hotly. One side of it had collapsed, the other was burning, and bright flames burst from the window holes and from under the roof.

When Pierre went through the gate, a wave of heat hit him, and he involuntarily stopped.

“Which, which is your house?” he asked.

“O-o-oh!” the girl wailed, pointing to the wing. “That one, that was our place. You’re burned up, my little treasure, Katechka, my precious little miss, o-o-oh!” wailed Aniska, looking at the fire and feeling a need to show her feelings as well.

Pierre tried to get to the wing, but the heat was so intense that he involuntarily swerved around the wing and ended up by the main house, which was burning only on one side of the roof and around which a crowd of Frenchmen swarmed. At first Pierre did not understand what these Frenchmen, who were dragging something out, were doing; but seeing a Frenchman in front of him who was beating a muzhik with the flat of his sword and trying to take a fox fur coat from him, Pierre vaguely realized that looting was going on there, but he had no time to stop at that thought.

The sound of cracking and the crash of falling walls and ceilings, the whistling and hissing of the flames, and the lively cries of the people, the sight of billowing clouds of smoke, now frowningly thick and black, now soaring up brightly, with flashes of sparks, and, here and there, of solid, sheaflike red or scaly golden flames creeping over the walls, the sensation of heat and smoke and quick movement, produced on Pierre the usual exhilarating effect of fires. This effect was especially strong on him because, at the sight of this fire, he suddenly felt freed of his burdensome thoughts. He felt young, cheerful, adroit, and resolute. He ran around the little wing from the direction of the house and was about to run to the part of it that was still standing, when just by his head he heard the cries of several voices and after that the crash and clang of something heavy falling next to him.

Pierre turned to look and saw Frenchmen in the windows of the house, throwing out the drawer of a chest filled with some sort of metal objects. Other French soldiers, standing on the ground, went up to the drawer.

“Eh bien, qu’est-ce qu’il veut celui-l&#224;?” one of the Frenchman called out to Pierre.

“Un enfant dans cette maison. N’avez-vous pas vu un enfant?” said Pierre.

“Tiens, qu’est-ce qu’il chante celui-l&#224;? Va te promener,” voices said, and one of the soldiers, probably fearing that Pierre would start taking from them the silver and bronze that were in the drawer, moved towards him menacingly.

“Un enfant?” a Frenchman shouted from above. “J’ai entendu piailler quelque chose au jardin. Peut-&#234;tre c’est son moutard au bonhomme. Faut &#234;tre humain, voyez-vous…”

“O&#249; est-il? O&#249; est-il?” asked Pierre.

“Par ici! Par ici!” the Frenchman called from the window, pointing to the garden behind the house. “Attendez, je vais descendre.”

And, in fact, a moment later the Frenchman, a dark-eyed fellow with a spot on his cheek, in his shirtsleeves, jumped out of a ground-floor window and, slapping Pierre on the shoulder, ran to the garden with him.

“D&#233;p&#234;chez-vous, vous autres,” he cried to his comrades, “il commence &#224; faire chaud.”

Having run behind the house onto a sand-strewn path, the Frenchman pulled Pierre by the arm and pointed him to the circle. Under a garden bench lay a three-year-old girl in a pink dress.

“Voil&#224; votre moutard. Ah, une petite, tant mieux,” said the Frenchman. “Au revoir, mon gros. Faut &#234;tre humain. Nous sommes tous mortels, voyez-vous.” And the Frenchman with the spot on his cheek ran back to his comrades.

Pierre, breathless with joy, ran to the girl and wanted to pick her up. But seeing a stranger, the sickly, scrofulous, unpleasant-looking little girl, who resembled her mother, screamed and tried to run away. Pierre picked her up anyhow and took her in his arms; she shrieked in a desperately angry voice and began tearing Pierre’s hands away with her own little hands and biting them with her slobbery mouth. Pierre was seized by a feeling of horror and squeamishness, such as he had experienced on touching some little animal. But he forced himself not to drop the child and ran with her back to the big house. But it was no longer possible to go back the same way; the wench Aniska was not there, and Pierre, with a feeling of pity and revulsion, pressing the suffering, sobbing, and wet little girl to him as tenderly as he could, ran through the garden to look for another way out.


XXXIV

When Pierre, having run around through courtyards and lanes, got back with his burden to the Gruzinskys’ garden at the corner of Povarskaya, he did not at first recognize the place from which he had gone to look for the child, it was so cluttered with people and belongings taken from the house. Besides Russian families with their chattels, escaped from the fire, there were also several French soldiers in various dress. Pierre paid no attention to them. He was in a hurry to find the official’s family, so as to give the daughter to the mother and go again to save someone. It seemed to Pierre that he had to do much more of something and do it quickly. Flushed from the heat and the running, Pierre at that moment experienced even more strongly than before that feeling of youth, animation, and determination which had taken hold of him as he was running to save the child. The girl had quieted down now and, holding on to Pierre’s kaftan with her little hands, sat on his arm and looked around like a wild animal. Pierre occasionally glanced at her and smiled slightly. It seemed to him that he saw something touchingly innocent and angelic in that frightened and sickly little face.

Neither the official nor his wife were in the former place now. Pierre strode quickly among the people, looking at various faces he came upon. He involuntarily noticed a Georgian or Armenian family, which consisted of a very old, handsome man with a face of the Oriental type, dressed in a new fur-lined coat and new boots, an old woman of the same type, and a young woman. This very young woman seemed to Pierre the perfection of Oriental beauty, with her sharply outlined, arched eyebrows and long face, of an extraordinarily delicate pink, beautiful and expressionless. Among the scattered belongings, in the crowd on the square, she, in her costly satin-covered winter coat and bright purple shawl, which covered her head, resembled a tender hothouse flower thrown out on the snow. She sat on some bundles slightly behind the old woman, and her big, dark, elongated eyes, with their long lashes, looked motionlessly at the ground. She clearly knew her own beauty and feared for it. Her face struck Pierre, and, hastening along the fence, he turned several times to look at her. On reaching the fence and still not finding those he wanted, Pierre stood looking around.

The figure of Pierre with the child in his arms was now even more noticeable than before, and several Russian men and women gathered around him.

“Have you lost someone, dear man? You’re a gentleman yourself, aren’t you? Whose child is it?” he was asked.

Pierre replied that the child belonged to a woman in a black coat who had been sitting in that place with her children, and asked if anyone knew her and where she had gone.

“That must be the Anferovs,” said an old deacon, addressing a pockmarked woman. “Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy,” he added in an accustomed bass.

“What Anferovs!” said the old woman. “The Anferovs left in the morning. It must be either Marya Nikolavna or the Ivanovs.”

“He says it was a woman, but Marya Nikolavna is a lady,” said a servant.

“You must know her—long teeth, thin,” said Pierre.

“That’s Marya Nikolavna. They went to the garden when these wolves swooped down on us,” said the woman, pointing to the French soldiers.

“Oh, Lord have mercy,” the deacon added again.

“Go that way, they’re over there. It’s her. She kept grieving, weeping,” the woman said again. “It’s her. Over there.”

But Pierre was not listening to the woman. For several seconds now, not taking his eyes away, he had been watching what was going on a few steps from him. He had been watching the Armenian family and two French soldiers who had gone up to them. One of the soldiers, a fidgety little man, was wearing a dark blue greatcoat tied with a rope. There was a cap on his head; his feet were bare. The other, who especially struck Pierre, was a tall, stooping, thin, flaxen-haired man with sluggish movements and an idiotic expression on his face. This one was dressed in a long frieze coat, dark blue trousers, and big, torn jackboots. The bootless little Frenchman in the dark blue greatcoat went up to the Armenians, said something, and at once took hold of the old man’s legs, and the old man at once began to take off his boots. The other one, in the woman’s coat, stood in front of the beautiful Armenian girl and looked at her silently, fixedly, with his hands in his pockets.

“Take the child, take her,” said Pierre, addressing the woman peremptorily and hurriedly, and handing her the girl. “Give her to them!” he almost shouted at the woman, sitting the screaming little girl on the ground, and he again looked at the Frenchmen and the Armenian family. The old man was already sitting without his boots. The little Frenchman had taken the remaining boot off him and was slapping the two boots against each other. The old man, sobbing, was saying something, but Pierre saw it only fleetingly; his whole attention was turned to the Frenchman in the long coat, who meanwhile moved towards the young woman, swaying slowly, and, taking his hands out of his pockets, put them to her neck.

The Armenian beauty went on sitting in the same motionless position, with her long lashes lowered, as if she did not see or feel what the soldier was doing to her.

While Pierre was running the few steps that separated him from the Frenchman, the tall looter in the long coat was already tearing the necklace that the Armenian girl was wearing from her neck, and the young woman, seizing her neck with her hands, cried out in a piercing voice.

“Laissez cette femme!” Pierre rasped in a furious voice, seizing the tall, stooping soldier by the shoulders and flinging him away. The soldier fell, got up, and ran off. But his comrade, throwing down the boots, drew his sword and moved threateningly towards Pierre.

“Voyons, pas de b&#234;tises!” he cried.

Pierre was in that ecstasy of fury in which he was oblivious to everything and his strength increased tenfold. He fell upon the barefoot Frenchman and, before he had time to draw his sword, had already knocked him off his feet and was pummeling him with his fists. An approving cry came from the surrounding crowd, and at the same time a mounted patrol of French uhlans appeared from around the corner. The uhlans trotted up to Pierre and the Frenchman and surrounded them. Pierre remembered nothing of what came after that. He remembered beating something, being beaten, and in the end felt that his hands were tied and that a crowd of French soldiers was standing around him, searching his clothes.

“Il a un poignard, lieutenant,” were the first words Pierre understood.

“Ah, une arme!” said the officer, and he turned to the barefoot soldier who had been taken together with Pierre.

“C’est bon, vous direz tout cela au conseil de guerre,” said the officer. And then he turned to Pierre. “Parlez-vous fran&#231;ais, vous?”

Pierre looked around with bloodshot eyes and did not reply. His face probably looked very frightful, because the officer said something in a whisper, and four more uhlans separated from the unit and stood on either side of Pierre.

“Parlez-vous fran&#231;ais?” the officer repeated the question, keeping his distance from him. “Faites venir l’interpr&#232;te.”

A little man in Russian civil dress rode out of the ranks. By his clothes and pronunciation, Pierre recognized him at once as a Frenchman from one of the Moscow shops.

“Il n’a pas l’air d’un homme du peuple,” said the interpreter, looking Pierre over.

“Oh, oh! &#231;a m’a bien l’air d’un des incendiaires,” said the officer. “Demandez-lui ce qu’il est?” he added.

“Who you?” asked the interpreter. “You must answer the superiority,” he said.

“Je ne vous dirai pas qui je suis. Je suis votre prisonnier. Emm&#232;nemoi,” Pierre suddenly said in French.

“Ah! Ah!” said the officer, frowning. “Marchons!”

A crowd had gathered around the uhlans. Closest to Pierre stood the pockmarked woman with the girl; when the patrol started off, she moved forward.

“Where are they taking you, my dearest?” she asked. “The girl, what am I to do with the girl, if she’s not theirs?” said the woman.

“Qu’est-ce qu’elle veut cette femme?” asked the officer.

Pierre was like a drunk man. His ecstatic state increased still more at the sight of the girl he had saved.

“Ce qu’elle dit?” he said. “Elle m’apporte ma fille que je viens de sauver des flammes,” he said. “Adieu!” and, not knowing himself how this pointless lie had escaped him, he walked with resolute, solemn steps between the Frenchmen.

The French patrol was one of those that had been sent out on Durosnel’s orders to various streets in Moscow, to stop looting and especially to catch the incendiaries, who, in the general opinion for that day among the French higher command, were the cause of the fires. Having gone around a few streets, the patrol had picked up some five more suspicious Russians—one shopkeeper, two seminarians, a muzhik, a servant—and a few looters. But of all the suspicious people, Pierre seemed the most suspicious. When they were all taken to spend the night in a big house on the Zubovsky rampart, where a guardhouse had been set up, Pierre was placed separately under strict guard.






          Part One          


I

In Petersburg, in the highest circles, a complex struggle was going on with greater heat than ever between the parties of Rumyantsev, the French, Maria Feodorovna, the grand duke, and others, drowned as always by the humming of the court drones. But the calm, luxurious life of Petersburg, concerned only with phantoms, with reflections of life, went on as of old; and beyond this course of life it took great effort to realize the danger and the difficult situation the Russian people were in. There were the same levees and balls, the same French theater, the same interests of the courts, the same interests of the service and intrigues. Only in the very highest circles were efforts made to keep in mind the difficulty of the present situation. It was recounted in whispers how differently from each other the two empresses behaved in these difficult circumstances. The empress Maria Feodorovna, concerned with the welfare of the almshouses and orphanages in her charge, made arrangements to move all the institutions to Kazan, and the belongings of these establishments had already been packed. The empress Elizaveta Alexeevna, however, to the question of what orders she would be pleased to give, kindly replied, with characteristic Russian patriotism, that she could give no orders about state institutions, since that was the sovereign’s concern; as for what depended on her personally, she kindly replied that she would be the last to leave Petersburg.

On the twenty-sixth of August, the very day of the battle of Borodino, Anna Pavlovna had a soir&#233;e, the centerpiece of which was to be the reading of a letter from the metropolitan, written on the occasion of sending the sovereign an icon of St. Sergius. This letter was considered a model of patriotic, spiritual eloquence. It was to be read by Prince Vassily, famous for his artistic recitations. (He also used to read at the empress’s.) Artistic recitation consisted in pouring out words loudly, melodiously, alternating between a desperate howl and a tender murmur, quite regardless of their meaning, so that it was quite by chance that one word fell in with the howling and others with the murmuring. This reading, like all of Anna Pavlovna’s soir&#233;es, had a political significance. Several important persons were to be there, who had to be shamed for going to the French theater and inspired with patriotic sentiments. A good many people had already gathered, but Anna Pavlovna still did not see everyone she needed in her drawing room, and therefore would not let the reading begin, but initiated a general conversation.

The news of the day for that day in Petersburg was the illness of Countess Bezukhov. Several days earlier the countess had unexpectedly fallen ill, had missed several gatherings of which she was the adornment, and rumor had it that she was not receiving anyone, and that, instead of the famous Petersburg doctors who usually treated her, she had entrusted herself to some Italian doctor who was treating her in some new and unusual way.

Everyone knew very well that the lovely countess’s illness came from the inconvenience of marrying two husbands at once, and that the Italian’s treatment consisted in removing that inconvenience; but in Anna Pavlovna’s presence not only did no one dare to think about it, but it was as if no one knew it.

“On dit que la pauvre comtesse est tr&#232;s mal. Le m&#233;decin dit que c’est l’angine pectorale.”

“L’angine? Oh, c’est une maladie terrible!”

“On dit que les rivaux se sont r&#233;concili&#233;s gr&#226;ce &#224; l’angine…”

The word angine was repeated with great pleasure.

“Le vieux comte est touchant &#224; ce qu’on dit. Il a pleur&#233; comme un enfant quand le m&#233;decin lui a dit que le cas &#233;tait dangereux.”

“Oh, ce serait une perte terrible. C’est une femme ravissante.”

“Vous parlez de la pauvre comtesse,” said Anna Pavlovna, approaching. “J’ai envoy&#233; savoir de ses nouvelles. On m’a dit qu’elle allait un peu mieux. Oh, sans doute, c’est la plus charmante femme du monde,” said Anna Pavlovna with a smile at her own rapturousness. “Nous appartenons &#224; des camps diff&#233;rents, mais cela ne m’emp&#234;che pas de l’&#233;stimer, comme elle le m&#233;rite. Elle est bien malheureuse,” Anna Pavlovna added.

Supposing that by these words Anna Pavlovna had slightly lifted the veil of secrecy over the countess’s illness, one imprudent young man allowed himself to express surprise that, instead of calling in famous doctors, the countess was being treated by a charlatan who might give her dangerous remedies.

“Vos informations peuvent &#234;tre meilleures que les miennes,” Anna Pavlovna suddenly fell venomously upon the inexperienced young man. “Mais je sais de bonne source que ce m&#233;decin est un homme tr&#232;s savant et tr&#232;s habile. C’est le m&#233;decin intime de la reine d’Espagne.” And having thus annihilated the young man, Anna Pavlovna turned to Bilibin, who, in another circle, having gathered his skin and clearly preparing to release it again in order to utter un mot, was talking about the Austrians.

“Je trouve que c’est charmant,” he said of a diplomatic paper sent to Vienna together with the Austrian standards taken by Wittgenstein, le h&#233;ros de P&#233;tropol (as he was known in Petersburg).

“How, how is that?” Anna Pavlovna addressed him, inducing silence for the hearing of the mot, which she already knew.

And Bilibin repeated the following actual words from the diplomatic dispatch he had composed:

“L’Empereur renvoie les drapeaux Autrichiens,” said Bilibin, “drapeaux amis et &#233;gar&#233;s qu’il a trouv&#233; hors de la route,” Bilibin concluded, releasing his skin.

“Charmant, charmant,” said Prince Vassily.

“C’est la route de Varsovie peut-&#234;tre,” Prince Ippolit said loudly and unexpectedly. Everyone turned to him, not understanding what he meant to say by that. Prince Ippolit also looked around with merry surprise. Like everyone else, he did not understand the meaning of the words he had spoken. In the course of his diplomatic career, he had noticed more than once that words spoken suddenly like that turned out to be very witty, and, just in case, he had spoken these words, the first that came to his tongue. “Maybe it will turn out very well,” he thought, “and if it doesn’t, they’ll be able to fix things up.” Indeed, during the awkward silence that ensued, the insufficiently patriotic person whom Anna Pavlovna was waiting for in order to convert came in, and she, smiling and shaking her finger at Ippolit, invited Prince Vassily to the table and, giving him two candles and the manuscript, asked him to begin. Everything became silent.

“Most Gracious Sovereign Emperor!” Prince Vassily proclaimed sternly and looked the public over as if asking if anyone had anything to say against it. But no one said anything. “The first capital, Moscow, the New Jerusalem, receives her Christ,” he suddenly emphasized the word her, “as a mother her zealous sons into her embrace, and through the gathering darkness, foreseeing the brilliant glory of thy dominion, sings in ecstasy: ‘Hosanna, blessed is He that comes!’” These last words Prince Vassily uttered in a tearful voice.

Bilibin was attentively examining his fingernails, and many, clearly grown timid, seemed to be asking what they were guilty of. Anna Pavlovna, like a little old woman repeating the prayer before communion, whispered in advance: “Let the brazen and insolent Goliath…”

Prince Vassily continued:

“Let the brazen and insolent Goliath from the borders of France encompass the ends of Russia in deathly horror; meek faith, that sling of the Russian David, will suddenly crush the head of his bloodthirsty pride. Behold the image of St. Sergius, zealous of old after the good of our fatherland, is being offered to Your Imperial Majesty. I lament that my failing strength prevents me from delighting in seeing Your most gentle face. I have sent up to heaven my warm prayers that the Almighty may exalt the generation of the righteous and fulfill among the blessed the wishes of Your Majesty.”

“Quelle force! Quel style!” were heard in praise of the reader and of the writer. Inspired by this speech, Anna Pavlovna’s guests talked for a long time about the situation of the fatherland and made various conjectures about the outcome of the battle which was to be offered one of those days.

“Vous verrez,” said Anna Pavlovna, “tomorrow, on the sovereign’s birthday, we’ll receive news. I have a good presentiment.”


II

Anna Pavlovna’s presentiment indeed proved true. The next day, during the prayer service in the palace on the occasion of the sovereign’s birthday, Prince Volkonsky was called out of the church and received an envelope from Prince Kutuzov. This was Kutuzov’s report written from Tatarinovo on the day of the battle. Kutuzov wrote that the Russians had not retreated a step, that the French losses were much greater than ours, that he was reporting in haste from the battlefield, and had not yet had time to gather the latest information. Which meant it was a victory. And at once, before leaving church, thanks were offered up to the Creator for His help and for the victory.

Anna Pavlovna’s presentiment proved true, and for the whole morning a joyfully festive mood reigned in the city. Everyone took the victory for an accomplished fact, and some already spoke of the capture of Napoleon himself, of his deposition and the choice of a new head for France.

Far from the action and amidst the conditions of court life, one could hardly expect events to be reflected in all their fullness and force. Involuntarily, general events group themselves around some specific occurrence. So now the main joy of the courtiers consisted as much in the fact that news of the victory arrived precisely on the sovereign’s birthday, as in the fact that we had been victorious. This was like a successful surprise. In Kutuzov’s report mention was also made of the Russian losses, and among them Tuchkov, Bagration, and Kutaisov were named. The sad side of the event, in the local Petersburg world, also involuntarily grouped itself around one event: the death of Kutaisov. Everyone knew him, the sovereign liked him, he was young and interesting. On that day people met each other with the words:

“How surprisingly it happened. During the prayer service. But what a loss Kutaisov is! Ah, what a pity!”

“What did I tell you about Kutuzov?” Prince Vassily now kept saying with the pride of a prophet. “I always said he alone was capable of defeating Napoleon.”

But the next day no news came from the army, and the general voice became anxious. The courtiers suffered over the suffering of uncertainty in which the sovereign found himself.

“What a position the sovereign is in!” said the courtiers, and they no longer extolled Kutuzov as they had the day before, but denounced him for being the cause of the sovereign’s worry. That day Prince Vassily no longer boasted of his prot&#233;g&#233; Kutuzov, but kept silent when the conversation turned to the commander in chief. Besides, towards the evening of that day it was as if everything combined to plunge the inhabitants of Petersburg into anxiety and worry; one more piece of terrible news was added: Countess Elena Bezukhov had died suddenly of that terrible illness, the name of which it had been so pleasant to articulate. Officially, in large gatherings, everyone said that Countess Bezukhov had died of a terrible attack of angine pectorale, but in intimate circles details were recounted of how le m&#233;decin intime de la Reine d’Espagne had prescribed H&#233;l&#232;ne small doses of some medicine to produce a certain effect; but H&#233;l&#232;ne, tormented by the old count’s suspicions and by the fact that her husband, to whom she had written (that wretched, depraved Pierre), would not answer her, had suddenly taken a huge dose of the prescribed medicine and had died in agony before aid could be given. The story went that Prince Vassily and the old count were about to set upon the Italian; but the Italian showed them such notes from the unfortunate deceased woman that they let him go at once.

General conversation concentrated itself around three grievous events: the sovereign’s uncertainty, the loss of Kutaisov, and the death of H&#233;l&#232;ne.

On the third day after Kutuzov’s report, a landowner arrived in Petersburg from Moscow, and the news spread throughout the city about the surrender of Moscow to the French. This was terrible! Imagine the sovereign’s position! Kutuzov was a traitor, and Prince Vassily, during the visites de condol&#233;ances paid to him on the occasion of his daughter’s death, said of the formerly praised Kutuzov (it was forgivable for him, in his sorrow, to forget what he had said before) that nothing else could have been expected from a blind and depraved old man.

“I’m only surprised that the destiny of Russia could have been entrusted to such a man.”

As long as this news remained unofficial, it could still be doubted, but the next day the following report came from Count Rastopchin:

Prince Kutuzov’s adjutant has brought me a letter in which he requests police officers from me to lead the army to the Ryazan road. He says that he is abandoning Moscow with regret. Sovereign! Kutuzov’s action decides the fate of the capital and of your empire. Russia will shudder on learning that the city in which Russia’s greatness is centered, where the remains of your ancestors lie, is given up to the enemy. I will follow the army. I have evacuated everything, all that is left for me is to weep over the fate of my fatherland!

Having received this report, the sovereign sent Prince Volkonsky to Kutuzov with the following rescript:

Prince Mikhail Ilarionovich! I have had no reports from you since August 29. Meanwhile I received on September 1, through Yaroslavl, from the Moscow commander in chief, the grievous news that you and the army have decided to abandon Moscow. You can imagine the effect that this news has made on me, and your silence redoubles my astonishment. I am sending this by my adjutant general, Prince Volkonsky, in order to learn from you the situation of the army and the reasons that prompted you to such a grievous resolution.


III

Nine days after Moscow was abandoned, a messenger sent by Kutuzov reached Petersburg with an official announcement that Moscow had been abandoned. This messenger was the Frenchman Michaud, who did not know Russian, but quoique &#233;tranger, Russe de coeur et d’&#226;me, as he said of himself.

The sovereign received the messenger at once in his office in the palace on Kamenny Island. Michaud, who had never seen Moscow before the campaign and who did not know Russian, all the same felt deeply moved when he appeared before notre tr&#232;s gracieux souverain (as he wrote) with news of the Moscow fire, dont les flammes &#233;clairaient sa route.

Though the source of Mr. Michaud’s chagrin was bound to be different from that which caused the grief of Russian people, Michaud, when he was led to the sovereign’s office, had such a mournful face that the sovereign asked him at once:

“M’apportez-vous de tristes nouvelles, colonel?”

“Bien tristes, Sire,” replied Michaud, lowering his eyes with a sigh, “l’abandon de Moscou.”

“Aurait-on livr&#233; mon ancienne capitale sans se battre?” the sovereign said quickly, suddenly flushing.

Michaud respectfully conveyed what he had been ordered to convey from Kutuzov—namely, that it had been impossible to fight near Moscow, and that, as one choice remained, to lose both the army and Moscow or Moscow alone, the field marshal had to choose the latter.

The sovereign listened silently, without looking at Michaud.

“L’ennemi est-il en ville?” he asked.

“Oui, Sire, et elle est en cendres &#224; l’heure qu’il est. Je l’ai laiss&#233;e toute en flammes,” Michaud said resolutely, but, glancing at the sovereign, Michaud was horrified at what he had done. The sovereign began to breathe heavily and quickly, his lower lip trembled, and his beautiful blue eyes instantly became moist with tears.

But this lasted only a moment. The sovereign suddenly frowned, as if disapproving of himself for his weakness. And, raising his head, he addressed Michaud in a firm voice:

“Je vois, colonel, par tout ce qui nous arrive,” he said, “que la providence exige de grands sacrifices de nous…Je suis pr&#234;t &#224; me soumettre &#224; toutes ses volont&#233;s; mais dites-moi, Michaud, comment avez-vous laiss&#233; l’arm&#233;e, en voyant ainsi, sans coup f&#233;rir, abandonner mon ancienne capitale? N’avez-vous pas aper&#231;u du d&#233;couragement?…”

Seeing that his tr&#232;s gracieux souverain had calmed down, Michaud also calmed down, but he had not yet had time to prepare an answer to the direct and essential question of the sovereign, which also required a direct answer.

“Sire, me permettrez-vous de vous parler franchement en loyal militaire?” he said, to gain time.

“Colonel, je l’exige toujours,” said the sovereign. “Ne me cachez rien, je veux savoir absolument ce qu’il en est.”

“Sire!” said Michaud, with a fine, barely perceptible smile on his lips, having had time to prepare his answer in the form of a light and respectful jeu de mots. “Sire! j’ai laiss&#233; toute l’arm&#233;e depuis les chefs jusqu’au dernier soldat, sans exception, dans une crainte &#233;pouvantable, effrayante…”

“Comment &#231;a?” the sovereign interrupted with a stern frown. “Mes Russes se laisseront-ils abattre par le malheur…Jamais!…”

Michaud was only waiting for that in order to put in his play on words.

“Sire,” he said with a respectful playfulness of expression, “ils craignent seulement que Votre Majest&#233; par bont&#233; de coeur ne se laisse persuader de faire la paix. Ils br&#251;lent de combattre,” said the plenipotentiary of the Russian people, “et de prouver &#224; Votre Majest&#233; par le sacrifice de leur vie, combien ils lui sont d&#233;vou&#233;s…”

“Ah!” the sovereign said calmly now and with a benign twinkle in his eyes, slapping Michaud on the shoulder. “Vous me tranquillisez, colonel.”

The sovereign lowered his head and was silent for a time.

“Eh bien, retournez &#224; l’arm&#233;e,” he said, drawing himself up to his full height and addressing Michaud with a benign and majestic gesture, “et dites &#224; nos braves, dites &#224; tous mes bons sujets partout o&#249; vous passerez, que quand je n’aurais plus aucun soldat, je me mettrai moi-m&#234;me &#224; la t&#234;te de ma ch&#232;re noblesse, de mes bons paysans, et j’userai ainsi jusqu’&#224; la derni&#232;re ressource de mon empire. Il m’en offre encore plus que mes ennemis ne pensent,” the sovereign spoke with ever increasing animation. “Mais si jamais il fut &#233;crit dans les decrets de la divine providence,” he said, raising to heaven his beautiful, meek eyes, shining with emotion, “que ma dynastie d&#251;t cesser de r&#233;gner sur le tr&#244;ne de mes anc&#234;tres, alors, apr&#232;s avoir &#233;puis&#233; tous les moyens qui sont en mon pouvoir, je me laisserai cro&#238;tre la barbe jusqu’ici” (the sovereign put his hand to the middle of his chest), “et j’irai manger des pommes de terre avec le dernier de mes paysans plut&#244;t que de signer la honte de ma patrie et de ma ch&#232;re nation, dont je sais appr&#233;cier les sacrifices!…” Having spoken these words in an agitated voice, the sovereign suddenly turned away, as if wishing to conceal from Michaud the tears that had come to his eyes, and went further into his office. Having stood there for a few moments, he returned to Michaud with big strides and with a forceful gesture pressed his arm below the elbow. The sovereign’s beautiful, meek face became flushed, and his eyes burned with the fire of resolution and wrath.

“Colonel Michaud, n’oubliez pas ce que je vous dis ici; peut-&#234;tre qu’un jour nous nous le rappellerons avec plaisir…Napol&#233;on ou moi,” said the sovereign, touching his breast. “Nous ne pouvons plus r&#233;gner ensemble. J’ai appris &#224; le conna&#238;tre, il ne me trompera plus…” And the sovereign frowned and fell silent.

Hearing these words, seeing the expression of firm resolution in the sovereign’s eyes, Michaud, quoique &#233;tranger, mais Russe de coeur et d’&#226;me, felt himself at this moment enthousiasm&#233; par tout ce qu’il venait d’entendre (as he said afterwards), and he expressed in the following terms his own feelings as well as the feelings of the Russian people, of whom he regarded himself as the plenipotentiary.

“Sire!” he said. “Votre Majest&#233; signe dans ce moment la gloire de la nation et le salut de l’Europe.”

The sovereign inclined his head, dismissing Michaud.


IV

At that time when Russia was half conquered and the inhabitants of Moscow were fleeing to the distant provinces, and one popular militia after another was rising to the defense of the fatherland, we, who were not living at that time, involuntarily imagine that all Russian people, great and small, were taken up only with sacrificing themselves, saving the fatherland, or weeping over its loss. The stories and descriptions of that time all speak without exception of self-sacrifice, love of the fatherland, despair, grief, and the heroism of the Russians. In reality, it was not like that. It seems so to us only because all we see in the past is the general historical interest of the time, and we do not see all those personal, human interests that the people of that time had. And yet in reality the personal interests of the day are so much more significant than the general interests that as a result the general interests are never felt (or even noticed at all). The majority of the people of that time paid no attention to the general course of things, but were guided only by the personal interests of the day. And those people were the most useful figures of that time.

Those, however, who tried to understand the general course of things and wanted to take part in it with self-sacrifice and heroism, were the most useless members of society; they saw everything inside out, and everything they did to be useful turned out to be useless nonsense, like Pierre’s and Mamonov’s regiments, which looted Russian villages, like the lint that young ladies plucked and that never got to the wounded, and so on. Even those who were fond of being clever and expressing their feelings, when discussing the present situation of Russia, involuntarily gave their speeches the stamp either of pretense and falseness, or of useless condemnation and spite against the people, accusing them of something no one could be guilty of. In historical events what is most obvious is the prohibition against eating the fruit of the tree of knowledge. Only unconscious activity bears fruit, and a man who plays a role in a historical event never understands its significance. If he attempts to understand it, he is struck with fruitlessness.

The significance of the event that was then taking place in Russia was the less conspicuous the closer a man’s participation in it was. In Petersburg and in provincial towns far from Moscow, ladies and men in militia uniform wept over Russia and the capital and spoke of self-sacrifice and so on; but in the army that was retreating beyond Moscow, there was almost no talk or thought of Moscow and, looking at it burning, no one swore revenge on the French, but they thought of the next pay day, of their next halt, of Matryoshka the sutler, and the like…

Nikolai Rostov, without any aim of self-sacrifice, but by chance, since the war found him in the service, took a direct and prolonged part in the defense of the fatherland, and therefore looked without despair and dark conclusions at what was then happening in Russia. If he had been asked what he thought of the present situation in Russia, he would have said that there was nothing for him to think, that Kutuzov and others were there for that, and that he had heard that regiments were being replenished, and that it must mean the fighting would go on for a long time yet, and that, in the present circumstances, it would be no wonder to him if he got a regiment within a couple of years.

Looking at things as he did, he took the news of his being sent to Voronezh to remount the division not only with no regret at not taking part in the coming fight, but with the greatest satisfaction, which he did not conceal, and which his comrades understood perfectly well.

Several days before the battle of Borodino, Nikolai received money, papers, and, sending his hussars on ahead, drove to Voronezh by post chaise.

Only someone who has experienced it—that is, who has spent several months on end in an atmosphere of active duty—can understand the pleasure Nikolai experienced when he got out of the area over which the troops spread their foraging operations, supply trains, and hospitals; when, instead of soldiers, carts, the dirty traces of a camp’s presence, he saw villages with peasant men and women, landowners’ houses, fields with grazing cattle, posting stations with sleeping stationmasters. He felt such joy as if he were seeing it all for the first time. What especially surprised and gladdened him for a long time were the young, healthy women, who did not each have a dozen officers dangling after them, and who were glad and flattered that a traveling officer joked with them.

In the most cheerful state of mind, Nikolai arrived at night at a hotel in Voronezh, ordered everything that he had long been deprived of in the army, and the next day, clean-shaven and wearing his long-unworn full-dress uniform, went to report to the authorities.

The head of the militia was a civilian general, an old man who clearly enjoyed his military title and rank. He received Nikolai gruffly (thinking it was the military way), and questioned him imposingly, as if he had the right to do so, approving and disapproving, as if he were discussing the general course of things. Nikolai felt so cheerful that he found it merely amusing.

From the head of the militia, he went to the governor. The governor was a lively little fellow, very gentle and simple. He pointed Nikolai to the stud farms where he might get horses, recommended a dealer in town and a landowner fifteen miles out of town who had the best horses, and promised him every sort of assistance.

“Are you the son of Count Ilya Andreevich? My wife was great friends with your mother. We receive on Thursdays; today’s a Thursday, kindly come to my place without any formalities,” said the governor, dismissing him.

Straight from the governor’s, Nikolai took relay horses and, putting the sergeant major in with him, galloped off to the landowner’s stud farm fifteen miles away. Everything in this initial period of his stay in Voronezh was cheerful and easy, and as happens when a man is well-disposed himself, everything went smoothly and swimmingly.

The landowner Nikolai went to was an old bachelor, a cavalry officer, a horse fancier, a hunter, the owner of a carpet room, of century-old honey vodka, old Hungarian wine, and superb horses.

After a couple of words, Nikolai bought seventeen stallions for six thousand, choice ones (as he said), to make a display of his remount. Having had dinner and drunk a bit too much Hungarian, Rostov exchanged kisses with the landowner, with whom he was already on familiar terms, and galloped back over the abominable road in the merriest spirits, constantly urging the driver on, so as to be back in time for the governor’s soir&#233;e.

Changed, scented, his head doused with cold water, Nikolai, somewhat late, but armed with the phrase vaut mieux tard que jamais, arrived at the governor’s.

It was not a ball, and no mention had been made of dancing, but everyone knew that Katerina Petrovna would play waltzes and &#233;cossaises on the clavichord and that there would be dancing, and, counting on that, everyone gathered as for a ball.

Provincial life in 1812 was exactly the same as ever, with the only difference that things were more lively in town because of the arrival of many rich families from Moscow, and that, as in everything that was going on at that time in Russia, some special boldness was noticeable in it—devil-may-care, harum-scarum—and also in that the banal conversation necessary among people, which formerly was about the weather and mutual acquaintances, was now about Moscow, the army, and Napoleon.

The society gathered at the governor’s was the best society of Voronezh.

There were a great many ladies, there were several of Nikolai’s Moscow acquaintances, but none of the men could in any way rival the bearer of the St. George, the remount officer of the hussars, who was at the same time the good-natured and well-bred Count Rostov. Among the men there was an Italian prisoner—an officer of the French army—and Nikolai felt that the presence of this prisoner further enhanced his significance as a Russian hero. He was like a trophy. Nikolai felt it, and it seemed to him that everyone looked at the Italian that way, and Nikolai treated this officer kindly, with dignity and restraint.

As soon as Nikolai entered in his hussar uniform, spreading about him the smell of scent and wine, and said himself and heard said to him several times the words “vaut mieux tard que jamais,” he was surrounded; all eyes turned to him, and he felt at once that he had stepped into the position of the universal favorite, which befitted him in the province, and was always agreeable, but now, after prolonged privation, made him drunk with pleasure. Not only in posting stations, inns, and the landowner’s carpet room were the servant girls flattered by his attentions, but here, at the governor’s soir&#233;e, there was (as it seemed to Nikolai) an inexhaustible number of young ladies and pretty girls who were waiting impatiently for him to pay attention to them. Ladies and girls flirted with him, and from the first day the old folk began bustling about to get this dashing scapegrace of a hussar married and settled down. Among the latter was the governor’s wife herself, who received Rostov like a close relation, called him “Nicolas” and “my dear.”

Katerina Petrovna indeed began to play waltzes and &#233;cossaises, and dancing began, in which Nikolai charmed the whole provincial society still more with his adroitness. He even surprised them with his special, casual way of dancing. Nikolai was surprised himself at his way of dancing that evening. He had never danced that way in Moscow, and even would have considered such an all-too-casual way of dancing improper and mauvais genre; but here he felt the need to astonish them all with something extraordinary, something which they would take as ordinary in the capital, but as yet unknown in the provinces.

All evening Nikolai paid most attention to a blue-eyed, plump, and sweet-looking blonde, the wife of one of the provincial officials. With the na&#239;ve conviction of young men making merry, that other men’s wives were created for them, Rostov never left this lady’s side and treated her husband in a friendly, somewhat conspiratorial way, as if, though there was no talk of it, they knew how nicely they would get along together—that is, Nikolai and this husband’s wife. The husband, however, did not seem to share that conviction and tried to sulk with Rostov. But Nikolai’s good-natured na&#239;vet&#233; was so boundless that now and then the husband involuntarily yielded to his merry spirits. Towards the end of the evening, however, as the wife’s face became ever more flushed and animated, her husband’s face became sadder and paler, as if they had one portion of animation between them, and as it increased in the wife, it diminished in the husband.


V

Nikolai, with a smile that never left his face, slightly curved in an armchair, sat bending closely over the blonde, paying her mythological compliments.

Briskly shifting the position of his legs in their tight riding breeches, spreading the smell of scent around him, and admiring his lady, and himself, and the fine shape of his legs in their tight buckskins, Nikolai was saying to the blonde that there was a certain lady there in Voronezh that he wanted to abduct.

“What sort of lady?”

“Charming, divine. Her eyes” (Nikolai looked at his interlocutrice) “are blue, her mouth is coral, the whiteness” (he glanced at her shoulders) “of her figure is like Diana’s…”

The husband came over to them and sulkily asked his wife what she was talking about.

“Ah! Nikita Ivanych,” said Nikolai, politely getting up. And, as if wishing Nikita Ivanych to share in the joke, he began telling him, too, about his wish to abduct a certain blonde lady.

The husband smiled sullenly, the wife gaily. The governor’s kindly wife came up to them with a disapproving air.

“Anna Ignatyevna wants to see you, Nicolas,” she said, uttering the words “Anna Ignatyevna” in such a tone that it became clear at once to Rostov that Anna Ignatyevna was a very important lady. “Come, Nicolas. You do allow me to call you that?”

“Oh, yes, ma tante. Who is she?”